# Meaning in history:
## Marx and Engels as *philosophes* of a second Enlightenment

**Louis Menand**, from the Introduction (2003) to *To the Finland Station* by Edmund Wilson (1940)

In pre-modern societies, the ends of life are given at the beginning of life:
people do things in their generation so that the same things will continue
to be done in the next generation. Meaning is immanent in all the ordinary
customs and practices of existence, since these are inherited from the past,
and are therefore worth reproducing. The idea is to make the world go not
forward, only around. In modern societies, the ends of life are not given at
the beginning of life; they are thought to be created or discovered. The
reproduction of the customs and practices of the group is no longer the
chief purpose of existence; the idea is not to repeat, but to change, to move
the world forward. Meaning is no longer immanent in the practices of
ordinary life, since those practices are understood by everyone to be
contingent and time-bound. This is why death, in modern societies, is the
great taboo, an absurdity, the worst thing one can imagine. For at the close
of life people cannot look back and know that they have accomplished the
task set for them at birth. This knowledge always lies up ahead,
somewhere over history's horizon. Modern societies don't know what will
count as valuable in the conduct of life in the long run, because they have
no way of knowing what conduct the long run will find itself in a position
to respect. The only certain knowledge death comes with is the knowledge
that the values of one's own time, the values one has tried to live by, are
expunge-able....

Marxism gave a meaning to modernity. It said that, wittingly or not, the
individual performs a role in a drama that has a shape and a goal, a
trajectory, and that modernity will turn out to be just one act in that drama.
Historical change is not arbitrary. It is generated by class conflict; it is
faithful to an inner logic; it points toward an end, which is the
establishment of the classless society. Marxism was founded on an appeal
for social justice, but there were many forms that such an appeal might
have taken. Its deeper attraction was the discovery of meaning, a meaning
in which human beings might participate, in history itself. When Wilson
explained, in his introduction to the 1972 edition of *To the Finland
Station*, that his book had been written under the assumption that 'an
important step in progress has been made, that a fundamental
"breakthrough" had occurred,' this is the faith he was referring to....
Marx and Engels were the *philosophes* of a second Enlightenment.
